kita.md, before:

# Not Very Good Toki Pona (ᴋɪᴛᴀ)

something something ma pona  
i marked things to be checked with `(?)`

| |
|:-|
| [ala](#ala) |
| [alasa](#alasa) |
| [anu](#anu) |
| [e](#e) |
| [esun](#esun) |
| [ken](#ken) |
| [la](#la) |
| [li](#li) |
| [kulupu](#kulupu) |
| [open/pini](#open-pini) |
| [pilin](#pilin) |
| [pona](#pona) |
| [pu](#pu) |
| [weka](#weka) |
| [wile](#wile) |
| [Numbers](#numbers) |
| [Prepositions](#prepositions) |
| [Extra words](#extra-words) |
| [Oddities](#oddities) |

## ala

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses the **X ala X** construction in places other than the predicate (?).

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *Did **you** do it?* | **sina ala sina li pali e ni?** | **sina anu jan ante li pali e ni?** /<br> **sina pali e ni anu seme?** /<br> **sina pali ala pali e ni?** |
| *Was the fish you ate good?* | **sina moku e kala (pi) pona ala pona?** | **sina moku e kala. ona li pona ala pona?** /<br>**sina moku e kala pona anu seme?** /<br> **sina moku ala moku e kala pona?**  |

## alasa

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **alasa** for *try to* where ᴛᴇᴘᴀɴ uses **lukin**. Additionally, ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **alasa** for *seek* where ᴛᴇᴘᴀɴ limits it to *hunt*.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *I'm trying to fix it.* | **mi alasa pona e ona.** | **mi lukin pona e ona.** |
| *She's seeking fortune.* | **ona li alasa e mani mute.** | **ona li lukin jo e mani mute.** |

## anu

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **anu** as a ᴄᴏɴᴛᴇɴᴛ ᴡᴏʀᴅ meaning *to choose*.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴛᴇᴘᴀɴ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *Choose your character!* | **o anu e jan sina!** | **o kama wile e jan sina!** |

## e

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **e** without an object, as a transitivity marker.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *They eat.* | **ona li moku e.** | **ona li moku (e ijo).** |

## esun

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **esun** to mean *trade/buy*, moving the previous meaning of *market* to **tomo esun** or **ma esun**.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *I bought some new pants.* | **mi kama esun e len noka sin.** | **mi kama jo e len noka sin kepeken mani.** |
| *This little piggy went to the market.* | **soweli lili ni li tawa ma esun.** | **soweli lili ni li tawa esun.** |

## la

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses a comma after **la** where ᴘᴜ uses it before **la**. ᴋɪᴛᴀ sometimes omits the comma to clarify nesting, or if the head phrase is short (more like if there's an adverb for it in English haha gottem).

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *If you are dead, you can't speak.* | **sina moli la, sina ken ala toki.** | **sina moli, la sina ken ala toki.** |
| *If it still hurts tomorrow, I'll talk to a doctor.* | **tenpo suno kama la ona li awen pana e pilin ike la, mi toki tawa jan pi pona sijelo.** | **ona li awen pana e pilin ike lon tenpo suno kama, la mi toki tawa jan pi pona sijelo.** | 

ᴋɪᴛᴀ sometimes omits ᴘʀᴇᴘᴏꜱɪᴛɪᴏɴs in ᴘʀᴇᴘᴏꜱɪᴛɪᴏɴᴀʟ ᴘʜʀᴀꜱᴇs.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *I think it's good for everyone.* | **(tawa) mi la, ona li pona tawa jan ale.** | **tawa mi la ona li pona tawa jan ale.** |

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **la** as a topic marker.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴛᴇᴘᴀɴ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *Bugs, I don't want to touch them.* | **pipi la, mi wile ala [pilin](#pilin) e ona.** | **mi wile ala luka e pipi.** |
| *On the topic of books, I just learned how to read!* | **lipu la, tenpo poka la mi kama sona lukin e sitelen!** | **ni lipu la tenpo poka la mi kama sona lukin e sitelen!** |
| *In other news, I bought some new clothes.* | **(ijo) ante la, mi [esun](#esun) e len sin.** | **ijo ante la mi kama jo e len sin kepeken mani.** |

## li

ᴋɪᴛᴀ sometimes omits the subject when it's clear what it should be, especially when it's also the subject of the previous sentence.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *"She's very friendly." "Writes well, too."* | **"ona li pona mute tawa jan." "li sitelen pona kin."** | **"ona li pona mute tawa jan." "sama la ona li sitelen pona."** |

## ken

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **ken** for *random*.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *It's all because of RNG.* | **ni ale li tan ken.** | (?) |

## kulupu

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **kulupu** for groups of all things, not just humans.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *This is my pen collection.* | **ni li kulupu mi pi ilo sitelen.** | **ni li ilo sitelen mute mi.** |
| *I joined a book club.* | **mi kama lon kulupu jan lipu.** | **mi kama lon kulupu lipu.** |

## pilin

ᴋɪᴛᴀ tends to use **pilin** to mean *touch*/*press* where **luka** would suffice.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *Don't touch that button!* | **o pilin ala e nena ni!** | **o luka ala e nena ni!** |

## pona

ᴋɪᴛᴀ almost never uses **pona** to mean *simple*, once again missing the point of Toki Pona.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *This job is simple.* | **pali ni li wile e pali lili.** | **pali ni li pona.** |

## pu

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **pu** as a noun, meaning *the official Toki Pona book*.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴛᴇᴘᴀɴ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *They wrote the word "tonsi" in their copy of Toki Pona: The Language of Good by Sonja Lang.* | **ona li sitelen e nimi "tonsi" lon pu ona.** | **ona li sitelen e nimi "tonsi" lon lipu pu ona.**<br>**ona li pu li sitelen e nimi "tonsi".** (maybe not) |

## weka

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **weka** to mean *leave*.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *She left her house.* | **ona li weka tan tomo ona.** | **ona li tawa weka tan tomo ona.** |

## wile

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **wile** almost exclusively as *want*, avoiding the deliberate conflation of *want*/*need* and missing the point of Toki Pona.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *I must move.* | **mi tawa ala la, ike li kama.** /<br>**mi o tawa.** /<br>**mi ken ala tawa ala.** | **mi wile tawa.** |

## Numbers

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses number words as nouns, omitting the **ijo** before them.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *pair* | **tu** | **ijo tu** |
| *hoard* | **mute** | **ijo mute** |
| *dozen* | **luka luka tu** (sure why not) | **ijo luka luka tu** |

## Prepositions

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses ᴘʀᴇᴘᴏꜱɪᴛɪᴏɴs in the subject.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *The bread on the table looks rotten.* | **pan lon supa moku li jaki tawa lukin.** | **pan pi supa moku li jaki tawa lukin.** |

When ᴋɪᴛᴀ turns **lon** or **tan** into a ɴᴏᴜɴ, the ɴᴏᴜɴ can have the meaning of the ᴘʀᴇᴘᴏꜱɪᴛɪᴏɴ's argument. This is similar to [***ᴋɪᴘᴏ***](kipo.md#Prepositions), but limited to *lon* and *tan*.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ/ᴋɪᴘᴏ | ᴛᴇᴘᴀɴ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *location*, *address* | **lon** | **ijo** (context) |
| *origin*, *source*, *cause*, *reason*, *motive* | **tan** | **mama** |

## Synonyms

ᴋɪᴛᴀ distinguishes **kin** from **a**, **kipisi** from **tu**, and **namako** from **sin**, but doesn't use **oko**.

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses the following deprecated words:

| Word | Definition | Alternatives |
|:-|:-|:-|
| **kan** | *with, among* (ᴘʀᴇᴘᴏꜱɪᴛɪᴏɴ) | **lon poka** |
| **leko** | *square, cube, stairs* | **sike ala**, **sijelo pi poka tu tu** |
| **majuna** | *old* | **sin ala**, **pi tenpo pini weka** |
| **monsuta** | *monster, to cause fear* | **pilin ike tan ike ken** |
| **pake** | *false, to trick* | **lon ala** |
| **powe** | *stop, cease* | **pini** |

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses the following new words:

| Word | Definition | Alternatives |
|:-|:-|:-|
| **ete** | *beyond, exceeding, ~~outside of,~~ more than* (ᴘʀᴇᴘᴏꜱɪᴛɪᴏɴ) | **ijo li pona mute tawa ijo ante.** / **ijo li pona. ijo ante li pona mute.** |
| **kiki** | *spiky, sharp, ~~angle, triangular~~* | **ken kipisi** |
| **jasima** | *reflect, resound, mirror, be on the opposite/polar end of* | **pana sin** (?) |
| **meso** | *average* | **li pona ala li ike ala**, **pi [pona/suli/etc] insa** |
| **misa** | *rat, mouse, squirrel, rabbit, rodent* | **soweli lili** |
| **n** | *(thinking noise)* (ᴏɴᴏᴍᴀᴛᴏᴘᴏᴇɪᴀ) | |
| **soko** | *fungus* | **kasi nasa** (?) |
| **soto/teje** | *left/right* | **poka open/pini (pi sitelen Lasina anu sitelen pona)**, **poka pilin / pi pilin ala** |
| **su** | *(forget what I just said)* | (?) |
| **taki** | *sticky, magnet* | (?) |
| **unu** | *purple* | **loje laso** |
| **waleja** | *context, topic, salience, pertinent, topical, pertain to, be relevant* | (?) |

ᴋɪᴛᴀ does not usually use **tonsi** (*transgender, nonbinary*), but this is solely due to not discussing the subject matter often.

ᴋɪᴛᴀ also uses a few humorous words: 

| Word | Definition |
|:-|:-|
| **jete** | *yeet, yote, ~~projectile, to project,~~ to throw* |
| **kijetesantakalu** | *member of the Musteloidea superfamily* |
| **nja** | *(a variant of **mu** for cats and other felines)* |
| **pa** | *bruh* (ᴏɴᴏᴍᴀᴛᴏᴘᴏᴇɪᴀ) |
| **poni** | *pony from My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic* |
| **sikomo** | *on a higher tier/plane, enlighten(ed), epic; to an exceedingly great extent* (from *sicko mode*) |
| **weko** | *Tetris* (from **weka leko**) |

## Oddities

ᴋɪᴛᴀ has on one occasion used the **X ala X** construction with **o**.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *Should he do it?* | *ona o ala o pali e ni?* | *ona o pali e ni anu seme?* |

ᴋɪᴛᴀ advocates for putting the comma before **la** in if/then statements to emphasize the preceding sentence, but doesn't do so in practice.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *If they arrive, I'll open the door.* | *ona li kama la, mi open e lupa.* | *ona li kama, la mi open e lupa.* |
| *They arrived, so I opened the door.* | *ona li kama, la mi open e lupa.* | *ona li kama. ni la, mi open e lupa.* |
| *If summer is long, the river will dry out.* | *tenpo seli li suli la, telo pi linja telo li kama weka.* | *tenpo seli li suli, la telo pi linja telo li kama weka.* |
| *The summer was long, causing the river to dry out.* | *tenpo seli li suli, la telo pi linja telo li kama weka.* | *tenpo seli li suli, li pali e ni: telo pi linja telo li kama weka.* |

Commit message:

moved kipisi, bolded rare definitions

kita.md, after:

# Not Very Good Toki Pona (ᴋɪᴛᴀ)

something something ma pona  
i marked things to be checked with `(?)`

| |
|:-|
| [ala](#ala) |
| [alasa](#alasa) |
| [anu](#anu) |
| [e](#e) |
| [esun](#esun) |
| [ken](#ken) |
| [la](#la) |
| [li](#li) |
| [kulupu](#kulupu) |
| [open/pini](#open-pini) |
| [pilin](#pilin) |
| [pona](#pona) |
| [pu](#pu) |
| [weka](#weka) |
| [wile](#wile) |
| [Numbers](#numbers) |
| [Prepositions](#prepositions) |
| [Extra words](#extra-words) |
| [Oddities](#oddities) |

## ala

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses the **X ala X** construction in places other than the predicate (?).

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *Did **you** do it?* | **sina ala sina li pali e ni?** | **sina anu jan ante li pali e ni?** /<br> **sina pali e ni anu seme?** /<br> **sina pali ala pali e ni?** |
| *Was the fish you ate good?* | **sina moku e kala (pi) pona ala pona?** | **sina moku e kala. ona li pona ala pona?** /<br>**sina moku e kala pona anu seme?** /<br> **sina moku ala moku e kala pona?**  |

## alasa

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **alasa** for *try to* where ᴛᴇᴘᴀɴ uses **lukin**. Additionally, ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **alasa** for *seek* where ᴛᴇᴘᴀɴ limits it to *hunt*.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *I'm trying to fix it.* | **mi alasa pona e ona.** | **mi lukin pona e ona.** |
| *She's seeking fortune.* | **ona li alasa e mani mute.** | **ona li lukin jo e mani mute.** |

## anu

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **anu** as a ᴄᴏɴᴛᴇɴᴛ ᴡᴏʀᴅ meaning *to choose*.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴛᴇᴘᴀɴ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *Choose your character!* | **o anu e jan sina!** | **o kama wile e jan sina!** |

## e

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **e** without an object, as a transitivity marker.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *They eat.* | **ona li moku e.** | **ona li moku (e ijo).** |

## esun

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **esun** to mean *trade/buy*, moving the previous meaning of *market* to **tomo esun** or **ma esun**.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *I bought some new pants.* | **mi kama esun e len noka sin.** | **mi kama jo e len noka sin kepeken mani.** |
| *This little piggy went to the market.* | **soweli lili ni li tawa ma esun.** | **soweli lili ni li tawa esun.** |

## la

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses a comma after **la** where ᴘᴜ uses it before **la**. ᴋɪᴛᴀ sometimes omits the comma to clarify nesting, or if the head phrase is short (more like if there's an adverb for it in English haha gottem).

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *If you are dead, you can't speak.* | **sina moli la, sina ken ala toki.** | **sina moli, la sina ken ala toki.** |
| *If it still hurts tomorrow, I'll talk to a doctor.* | **tenpo suno kama la ona li awen pana e pilin ike la, mi toki tawa jan pi pona sijelo.** | **ona li awen pana e pilin ike lon tenpo suno kama, la mi toki tawa jan pi pona sijelo.** | 

ᴋɪᴛᴀ sometimes omits ᴘʀᴇᴘᴏꜱɪᴛɪᴏɴs in ᴘʀᴇᴘᴏꜱɪᴛɪᴏɴᴀʟ ᴘʜʀᴀꜱᴇs.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *I think it's good for everyone.* | **(tawa) mi la, ona li pona tawa jan ale.** | **tawa mi la ona li pona tawa jan ale.** |

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **la** as a topic marker.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴛᴇᴘᴀɴ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *Bugs, I don't want to touch them.* | **pipi la, mi wile ala [pilin](#pilin) e ona.** | **mi wile ala luka e pipi.** |
| *On the topic of books, I just learned how to read!* | **lipu la, tenpo poka la mi kama sona lukin e sitelen!** | **ni lipu la tenpo poka la mi kama sona lukin e sitelen!** |
| *In other news, I bought some new clothes.* | **(ijo) ante la, mi [esun](#esun) e len sin.** | **ijo ante la mi kama jo e len sin kepeken mani.** |

## li

ᴋɪᴛᴀ sometimes omits the subject when it's clear what it should be, especially when it's also the subject of the previous sentence.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *"She's very friendly." "Writes well, too."* | **"ona li pona mute tawa jan." "li sitelen pona kin."** | **"ona li pona mute tawa jan." "sama la ona li sitelen pona."** |

## ken

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **ken** for *random*.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *It's all because of RNG.* | **ni ale li tan ken.** | (?) |

## kulupu

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **kulupu** for groups of all things, not just humans.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *This is my pen collection.* | **ni li kulupu mi pi ilo sitelen.** | **ni li ilo sitelen mute mi.** |
| *I joined a book club.* | **mi kama lon kulupu jan lipu.** | **mi kama lon kulupu lipu.** |

## pilin

ᴋɪᴛᴀ tends to use **pilin** to mean *touch*/*press* where **luka** would suffice.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *Don't touch that button!* | **o pilin ala e nena ni!** | **o luka ala e nena ni!** |

## pona

ᴋɪᴛᴀ almost never uses **pona** to mean *simple*, once again missing the point of Toki Pona.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *This job is simple.* | **pali ni li wile e pali lili.** | **pali ni li pona.** |

## pu

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **pu** as a noun, meaning *the official Toki Pona book*.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴛᴇᴘᴀɴ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *They wrote the word "tonsi" in their copy of Toki Pona: The Language of Good by Sonja Lang.* | **ona li sitelen e nimi "tonsi" lon pu ona.** | **ona li sitelen e nimi "tonsi" lon lipu pu ona.**<br>**ona li pu li sitelen e nimi "tonsi".** (maybe not) |

## weka

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **weka** to mean *leave*.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *She left her house.* | **ona li weka tan tomo ona.** | **ona li tawa weka tan tomo ona.** |

## wile

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses **wile** almost exclusively as *want*, avoiding the deliberate conflation of *want*/*need* and missing the point of Toki Pona.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *I must move.* | **mi tawa ala la, ike li kama.** /<br>**mi o tawa.** /<br>**mi ken ala tawa ala.** | **mi wile tawa.** |

## Numbers

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses number words as nouns, omitting the **ijo** before them.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *pair* | **tu** | **ijo tu** |
| *hoard* | **mute** | **ijo mute** |
| *dozen* | **luka luka tu** (sure why not) | **ijo luka luka tu** |

## Prepositions

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses ᴘʀᴇᴘᴏꜱɪᴛɪᴏɴs in the subject.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *The bread on the table looks rotten.* | **pan lon supa moku li jaki tawa lukin.** | **pan pi supa moku li jaki tawa lukin.** |

When ᴋɪᴛᴀ turns **lon** or **tan** into a ɴᴏᴜɴ, the ɴᴏᴜɴ can have the meaning of the ᴘʀᴇᴘᴏꜱɪᴛɪᴏɴ's argument. This is similar to [***ᴋɪᴘᴏ***](kipo.md#Prepositions), but limited to *lon* and *tan*.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ/ᴋɪᴘᴏ | ᴛᴇᴘᴀɴ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *location*, *address* | **lon** | **ijo** (context) |
| *origin*, *source*, *cause*, *reason*, *motive* | **tan** | **mama** |

## Synonyms

(~~strikethrough~~ indicates common meanings that aren't used by ᴋɪᴛᴀ, **bold** indicates rare meanings that are)

ᴋɪᴛᴀ distinguishes **kin** from **a** and **namako** from **sin**, but doesn't use **oko**.

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses the following deprecated words:

| Word | Definition | Alternatives |
|:-|:-|:-|
| **kan** | ***with, among (ᴘʀᴇᴘᴏꜱɪᴛɪᴏɴ)*** | **lon poka** |
| **kipisi** | *cut, split, divide* | **tu** |
| **leko** | *square, cube, stairs* | **sike ala**, **sijelo pi poka tu tu** |
| **majuna** | *old* | **sin ala**, **pi tenpo pini weka** |
| **monsuta** | *monster, to cause fear* | **pilin ike tan ike ken** |
| **pake** | *false, to trick* | **lon ala** |
| **powe** | *stop, cease* | **pini** |

ᴋɪᴛᴀ uses the following new words:

| Word | Definition | Alternatives |
|:-|:-|:-|
| **ete** | *beyond, exceeding, ~~outside of,~~ more than* (ᴘʀᴇᴘᴏꜱɪᴛɪᴏɴ) | **ijo li pona mute tawa ijo ante.** / **ijo li pona. ijo ante li pona mute.** |
| **kiki** | *spiky, sharp, ~~angle, triangular~~* | **ken kipisi** |
| **jasima** | *reflect, resound, mirror, be on the opposite/polar end of, **in reply*** | **pana sin** (?) |
| **meso** | *average* | **li pona ala li ike ala**, **pi [pona/suli/etc] insa** |
| **misa** | *rat, mouse, squirrel, rabbit, rodent* | **soweli lili** |
| **n** | *(thinking noise)* (ᴏɴᴏᴍᴀᴛᴏᴘᴏᴇɪᴀ) | |
| **soko** | *fungus* | **kasi nasa** (?) |
| **soto/teje** | *left/right* | **poka open/pini (pi sitelen Lasina anu sitelen pona)**, **poka pilin / pi pilin ala** |
| **su** | ***(forget what I just said)*** | (?) |
| **taki** | *sticky, magnet* | (?) |
| **unu** | *purple* | **loje laso** |
| **waleja** | *context, topic, salience, pertinent, topical, pertain to, be relevant* | (?) |

ᴋɪᴛᴀ does not usually use **tonsi** (*transgender, nonbinary*), but this is solely due to not discussing the subject matter often.

ᴋɪᴛᴀ also uses a few humorous words: 

| Word | Definition |
|:-|:-|
| **jete** | *yeet, yote, ~~projectile, to project,~~ to throw* |
| **kijetesantakalu** | *member of the Musteloidea superfamily* |
| **nja** | *(a variant of **mu** for cats and other felines)* |
| **pa** | *bruh* (ᴏɴᴏᴍᴀᴛᴏᴘᴏᴇɪᴀ) |
| **poni** | ***pony from My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic*** |
| **sikomo** | *on a higher tier/plane, enlighten(ed), epic; to an exceedingly great extent* (from *sicko mode*) |
| **weko** | ***Tetris*** (from **weka leko**) |

## Oddities

ᴋɪᴛᴀ has on one occasion used the **X ala X** construction with **o**.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *Should he do it?* | *ona o ala o pali e ni?* | *ona o pali e ni anu seme?* |

ᴋɪᴛᴀ advocates for putting the comma before **la** in if/then statements to emphasize the preceding sentence, but doesn't do so in practice.

| | ᴋɪᴛᴀ | ᴘᴜ |
|:-|:-|:-|
| *If they arrive, I'll open the door.* | *ona li kama la, mi open e lupa.* | *ona li kama, la mi open e lupa.* |
| *They arrived, so I opened the door.* | *ona li kama, la mi open e lupa.* | *ona li kama. ni la, mi open e lupa.* |
| *If summer is long, the river will dry out.* | *tenpo seli li suli la, telo pi linja telo li kama weka.* | *tenpo seli li suli, la telo pi linja telo li kama weka.* |
| *The summer was long, causing the river to dry out.* | *tenpo seli li suli, la telo pi linja telo li kama weka.* | *tenpo seli li suli, li pali e ni: telo pi linja telo li kama weka.* |
